[technote] Gateway performance (#175)
apollographql/docs: src/content/technotes/TN0009-gateway-performance.mdx

---
title: Apollo Gateway performance
id: TN0009
description: Suggestions for improving or investigating Apollo Gateway performance
tags: [gateway, performance]
---

Here are some suggestions for improving or investigating Apollo Gateway performance.

## Disable or sample `ftv1` inline tracing

> Inline tracing (also known as `ftv1`) is simple to use and provides field-level latency information in Apollo Studio, but it does come at a cost. Trace information is somewhat expensive to calculate and is attached to subgraph responses, increasing payload size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inline tracing (also known as federated tracing or `ftv1`) is simple to use and provides field-level latency information in Apollo Studio, however it does come at a cost. Trace information can be expensive to calculate and is attached to subgraph responses, increasing payload size.
```

Not sure if `simple` is okay here or not - @StephenBarlow can advise.

Author: removed "simple" in favor of "is on by default"

> Starting in Apollo Server 3.6, you can disable or sample inline tracing with the `fieldLevelInstrumentation` setting. During load testing, you may want to disable it entirely. For normal production traffic, you probably want to set it to a low number like `0.01` for one percent of requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting in Apollo Server 3.6, you can disable or sample inline tracing with the `fieldLevelInstrumentation` setting. During load testing, you may want to disable it entirely. For normal production traffic, you will likely want to set it to a low number such as `0.01`, which is one percent of requests.
```

[Usage Reporting plugin docs for `fieldLevelInstrumentation`](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/apollo-server/api/plugin/usage-reporting#fieldlevelinstrumentation)

## Change default `maxSockets` setting

> Out of the box, Apollo Gateway's default subgraph fetcher (`fetch` implementation) may not be configured appropriately for your system. In versions prior to v0.51.0, the default setting was 15 and probably too low for most systems. The new default is `Infinity`, which may be too high (but is a better default).

Reviewer 2: **note** It might be worth calling out that this setting controls the maximum connections _to each subgraph host/port_. Higher values mean that fewer subgraph requests will be queued, but that also means the event loop might stay busier serializing responses from subgraphs, etc.

> Out of the box, Apollo Gateway's default subgraph fetcher (`fetch` implementation) may not be configured appropriately for your system. In versions prior to v0.51.0, the default setting was 15 and probably too low for most systems. The new default is `Infinity`, which may be too high (but is a better default).

Reviewer: Can we explain _why_ infinite is better than 15?

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example of changing the default value is below. 

```

Reviewer 3: Might go with:

The following `ApolloGateway` constructor sets `maxSockets` to `50`:

```js
import {ApolloGateway, RemoteGraphQLDataSource} from '@apollo/gateway';
import fetcher from 'make-fetch-happen';

const gateway = new ApolloGateway({
  buildService({name, url}) {
    return new RemoteGraphQLDataSource({
      name,
      url,
      fetcher: fetcher.defaults({maxSockets: 50})
    });
  }
});
```

[Configuring the subgraph fetcher](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/api/apollo-gateway#configuring-the-subgraph-fetcher)

> ## Investigate migrating to Apollo Router

Reviewer: I would personally move this either up top as a recommendation to those sensitive to performance needs, as it'll more than likely fix any tooling around they'd need to do easily, or to the bottom as a final recommendation. In the middle feels weird to me imo.

Author: moved it to the top! i had a logic for the order but yeah it's a little weird

Apollo Router is a high-throughput, low-latency Apollo Federation GraphQL gateway written in Rust. Its performance and consistency is significantly better than any Node.js-based GraphQL gateway.

[Migrating to Apollo Router from @apollo/gateway](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/router/migrating-from-gateway)

## Instrument Gateway middleware and plugins

> If you've installed middleware (like Express middleware) or Apollo Server plugins, it's worth using a tool like [clinicjs](https://clinicjs.org/) to investigate potential issues like synchronous code blocking the main thread.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you've installed middleware (like Express middleware) or Apollo Server plugins, it's worth using a code profiling tool like [clinicjs](https://clinicjs.org/) to investigate potential issues, such as synchronous code blocking the main thread or expensive plugin functions. 
```

## Use OpenTelemetry tracing

> OpenTelemetry is the <abbr title="Cloud Native Computing Foundation">CNCF</abbr> standard for instrumenting distributed systems. By tracing Apollo Gateway, subgraph services, data sources, and any other systems in the request path, you may discover that the cause of performance issues occurs outside of Apollo Gateway.

Reviewer: fancy, didn't know there was a good way to handle acronyms.

Reviewer 3: Me neither!

[OpenTelemetry in Apollo Gateway](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/opentelemetry)

> ## Tweak CPU and memory limits

Reviewer: Is it worth calling out the CPU usage and how it affects latency above 50% usage?

Author: sure, how would you put it?

Reviewer: Added a first pass below!

You may need higher CPU and memory limits on your Apollo Gateway pods. Determining the best limits for your system depends on a number of factors:

- Size of operations
- Cardinality of operations (number of unique shapes)
- Complexity of query plans
- Subgraph latency
- Use of shared caches

In general, look at increasing memory limits as Node.js is single-threaded and cannot use more than one CPU.

## Check query plans

Query plans (the steps the Gateway takes to resolve an operation from multiple subgraphs) are almost always reasonable approximations of the original operation. They're also highly cacheable so they don't incur much of a performance penalty. But it's worth looking at them to make sure they're of an appropriate size and complexity. Fragment and abstract type usage may cause undesirable query plans in very specific cases.

```js
const gateway = new ApolloGateway({
  debug: true // print query plans to stdout
});
```

> ## Investigate subgraph latency

Reviewer: I would call out that most performance loss is actually due to the subgraph response time, and that should be the focus of investigation above all- the gateway does degrade if responses are slow and it needs to track multiple concurrent requests if they span a long time.

Try running load tests against the subgraphs directly. You can simulate requests from the Gateway by making "entities" queries:

```graphql
query MyQuery__subgraphA__0($representations: [_Any!]!) {
  _entities(representations: $representations) {
    ... on EntityA {
      fieldA
      fieldB
    }
    ... on EntityB {
      fieldC
      fieldD
    }
  }
}
```

> You may discover that you need to implement a [Dataloader](https://github.com/graphql/dataloader) in your [reference resolvers](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/entities#2-define-a-reference-resolver).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may discover that you need to implement a [dataloader](https://github.com/graphql/dataloader) in your [reference resolvers](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/entities#2-define-a-reference-resolver) in order to batch queries to your datastores, avoiding the N+1 problem.  
```

Reviewer: Not sure if it needs to be `dataloader` or `DataLoader` or `Dataloader` - GH uses the second, but generically it might be the first or third?

## Investigate subgraph latency

Try running load tests against the subgraphs directly. You can simulate requests from the Gateway by making "entities" queries:

```graphql
query MyQuery__subgraphA__0($representations: [_Any!]!) {
  _entities(representations: $representations) {
    ... on EntityA {
      fieldA
      fieldB
    }
    ... on EntityB {
      fieldC
      fieldD
    }
  }
}
```

By testing "entities" queries, you may discover that you need to implement a [DataLoader](https://github.com/graphql/dataloader) in your [reference resolvers](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/entities#2-define-a-reference-resolver).

The slower your subgraphs, the more time the Gateway spends keeping track of concurrent in-flight requests. The Gateway's maximum requests per second drops linearly as subgraph latencies rise.

## Tweak CPU and memory limits

You may need higher CPU and memory limits on your Apollo Gateway pods. Determining the best limits for your system depends on a number of factors:

- Size of operations
- Cardinality of operations (number of unique shapes)
- Complexity of query plans
- Subgraph latency
- Use of shared caches

> In general, look at increasing memory limits as Node.js is single-threaded and cannot use more than one CPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, look at increasing memory limits as Node.js is single-threaded and cannot use more than one CPU. Additionally, we recommend keeping CPU utilization below 50% if possible. 

At higher CPU utilization percentages, you may start to see event loop lag increase relative to usage which negatively impacts performance. Monitoring both metrics can help provide a clearer image of bottlenecks beyond just code profiling alone. 
```

Author: ah yeah that's very clear, thanks!

---
title: Apollo Gateway performance
id: TN0009
description: Suggestions for improving or investigating Apollo Gateway performance
tags: [gateway, performance]
---

Here are some suggestions for improving or investigating Apollo Gateway performance.

## Investigate migrating to Apollo Router

> Apollo Router is a high-throughput, low-latency Apollo Federation GraphQL gateway written in Rust. Its performance and consistency is significantly better than any Node.js-based GraphQL gateway.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Apollo Router is a high-throughput, low-latency Apollo Federation GraphQL gateway written in Rust. Its performance and consistency significantly exceed any Node.js-based gateway.
```

[Migrating to Apollo Router from @apollo/gateway](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/router/migrating-from-gateway)

> ## Disable or sample `ftv1` inline tracing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Disable or reduce `ftv1` inline tracing
```

> Inline tracing (also known as federated tracing or `ftv1`) is on by default and provides field-level latency information in Apollo Studio, however it does come at a cost. Trace information can be somewhat expensive to calculate and is attached to subgraph responses, increasing payload size.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Inline tracing (also known as federated tracing or `ftv1`) provides helpful field-level latency information in Apollo Studio, however it comes at a cost: trace information can be expensive to calculate, and it's attached to subgraph responses, increasing payload size.
```

> Starting in Apollo Server 3.6, you can disable or sample inline tracing with the `fieldLevelInstrumentation` setting. During load testing, you may want to disable it entirely. For normal production traffic, you will likely want to set it to a low number such as `0.01` (one percent of requests).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Apollo Server 3.6 and later, you can set the `fieldLevelInstrumentation` option to disable inline tracing entirely, or limit tracing to a representative sample of all requests.

* During load testing, we recommend disabling tracing entirely.
* For normal production traffic, we recommend setting a low sample rate such as `0.01` (one percent of requests).
```

> [Usage Reporting plugin docs for `fieldLevelInstrumentation`](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/apollo-server/api/plugin/usage-reporting#fieldlevelinstrumentation)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Usage Reporting plugin docs for `fieldLevelInstrumentation`](/apollo-server/api/plugin/usage-reporting#fieldlevelinstrumentation)
```

> ## Change default `maxSockets` setting

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Change the default `maxSockets` setting
```

> Out of the box, Apollo Gateway's default subgraph fetcher (`fetch` implementation) may not be configured appropriately for your system. In versions prior to v0.51.0, the default setting was 15 and probably too low for most systems. The new default is `Infinity`, which may be too high.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `maxSockets` setting controls the maximum number of connections that Apollo Gateway's `fetch` implementation can create to each subgraph host and port. With higher values, fewer subgraph requests are queued in the gateway, but the event loop might become overloaded serializing responses from subgraphs.

In Apollo Gateway versions prior to v0.51.0, the default `maxSockets` setting is `15`, which is too low for many systems. In later versions, the default is `Infinity`, which lends itself to the overload scenario.
```

Reviewer 3: Saying that Infinity "may be too high" made me chuckle so I tweaked that a bit 😄

> This setting controls the maximum connections to each subgraph host and port. Higher values mean that fewer subgraph requests will be queued, but that also means the event loop might stay busier serializing responses from subgraphs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

```js
import {ApolloGateway, RemoteGraphQLDataSource} from '@apollo/gateway';
import fetcher from 'make-fetch-happen';

const gateway = new ApolloGateway({
  buildService({name, url}) {
    return new RemoteGraphQLDataSource({
      name,
      url,
      fetcher: fetcher.defaults({maxSockets: 50})
    });
  }
});
```

> [Configuring the subgraph fetcher](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/api/apollo-gateway#configuring-the-subgraph-fetcher)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Configuring the subgraph fetcher](/federation/api/apollo-gateway#configuring-the-subgraph-fetcher)
```

## Instrument Gateway middleware and plugins

> If you've installed middleware (such as Express middleware) or Apollo Server plugins, it's worth using a code profiling tool such as [clinicjs](https://clinicjs.org/) to investigate potential issues such as synchronous code blocking the main thread or expensive plugin functions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you've installed middleware (such as Express middleware) or Apollo Server plugins, it's worth using a code profiling tool such as [clinicjs](https://clinicjs.org/) to investigate potential issues, such as synchronous code blocking the main thread or expensive plugin functions.
```

## Use OpenTelemetry tracing

> OpenTelemetry is the <abbr title="Cloud Native Computing Foundation">CNCF</abbr> standard for instrumenting distributed systems. By tracing Apollo Gateway, subgraph services, data sources, and any other systems in the request path, you may discover that the cause of performance issues occurs outside of Apollo Gateway.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry is the <abbr title="Cloud Native Computing Foundation">CNCF</abbr> standard for instrumenting distributed systems. By tracing Apollo Gateway, subgraph services, data sources, and any other systems in the request path, you might discover that the cause of performance issues occurs outside of Apollo Gateway.
```

[OpenTelemetry in Apollo Gateway](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/opentelemetry)

## Investigate subgraph latency

> Try running load tests against the subgraphs directly. You can simulate requests from the Gateway by making "entities" queries:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Try running load tests against the subgraphs directly. You can simulate requests from the Gateway by querying the `_entities` field:
```

```graphql
query MyQuery__subgraphA__0($representations: [_Any!]!) {
  _entities(representations: $representations) {
    ... on EntityA {
      fieldA
      fieldB
    }
    ... on EntityB {
      fieldC
      fieldD
    }
  }
}
```

> By testing "entities" queries, you may discover that you need to implement a [DataLoader](https://github.com/graphql/dataloader) in your [reference resolvers](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation/entities#2-define-a-reference-resolver).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By testing `_entities` queries, you might discover that you need to implement a [DataLoader](https://github.com/graphql/dataloader) in your [reference resolvers](/federation/entities#2-define-a-reference-resolver).
```

The slower your subgraphs, the more time the Gateway spends keeping track of concurrent in-flight requests. The Gateway's maximum requests per second drops linearly as subgraph latencies rise.

## Tweak CPU and memory limits

> You may need higher CPU and memory limits on your Apollo Gateway pods. Determining the best limits for your system depends on a number of factors:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You might need to set higher CPU and memory limits on your Apollo Gateway pods. Determining the best limits for your system depends on a number of factors:
```
